Vault abstraction for Galaxy (#12940)
galaxyproject/galaxy: doc/source/admin/special_topics/vault.md

# Storing secrets in the vault

Galaxy can be configured to store secrets in an external vault, which is useful for secure handling and centralization of secrets management.

> In particular, information fields in the "Manage information" section of the user profile, such as a dropbox password, can be configured to be stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, information fields in the "Manage information" section of the user profile, such as AWS credentials, can be configured to be stored
```

`/galaxy/user/2/preferences/aws/client_secret`.

## Vault backends

There are currently 3 supported backends.

| Backend     | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| hashicorp   | Hashicorp Vault is a secrets and encryption management system. https://www.vaultproject.io/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

> | custos      | Custos is an NSF-funded project, backed by open source software that provides science gateways such as Galaxy with single sign-on, group management, and management of secrets such as access keys and OAuth2 access tokens. Custos secrets managament is backed by Hashicorp's vault, but provides a convenient, always-on ReST API service. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| custos      | Custos is an NSF-funded project, backed by open source software that provides science gateways such as Galaxy with single sign-on, group management, and management of secrets such as access keys and OAuth2 access tokens. Custos secrets management is backed by Hashicorp's vault, but provides a convenient, always-on ReST API service. |
```

> | database    | The database backend stores secrets in an encrypted table in the Galaxy database itself. It is a convenient way to get started with a vault, and while it supports basic key rotation, we recommend using one of the above 2 options in production.                                                                                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| database    | The database backend stores secrets in an encrypted table in the Galaxy database itself. It is a convenient way to get started with a vault, and while it supports basic key rotation, we recommend using one of the other options in production.                                                                                           |
```

## Configuring Galaxy

The first step to using a vault is to configure the `vault_config_file` setting in `galaxy.yml`. 

```yaml
galaxy:
  # Vault config file
  # The value of this option will be resolved with respect to
  # <config_dir>.
  vault_config_file: vault_conf.yml
```

## Configuring vault_conf.yml

The vault_conf.yml file itself has two basic fields:
```yaml

> type: hashicorp  # required

Reviewer 2: If you only have a single top-level key there can't be any mixing of backends, I guess. Is that a realistic assumption ? If not this could be a list for instance ?

Author: I wondered about that and my thinking was that we could introduce a `hierarchical` or `composite` vault later, and that would have a nested array, similar to the Object Store. The main motivation was to keep things simple for starters and check usage and adoption.

I imagine the main reason to have multiple vaults would be if you needed to migrate from one vault to another. That could always be done programmatically from outside of Galaxy as well, but we could introduce a hierarchical vault later to support this.

Another reason I suppose could be if you needed to refer to existing secrets stored in multiple vaults, but that would require namespacing the vaults somehow and then specifying the namespace when reading keys, again, something we could probably introduce later if needed?

path_prefix: /galaxy  # optional
...
```

> The `type` must be a valid backend type. The `path_prefix` property indicates the root path under which to store all vault keys. If multiple Galaxy instances are using the same Vault, a prefix can be used to identify the galaxy instance uniquely for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `type` must be a valid backend type: `hashicorp`, `custos`, or `database`. The `path_prefix` property indicates the root path under which to store all vault keys. If multiple Galaxy instances are using the same vault, a prefix can be used to uniquely identify the Galaxy instance.
At the moment, only a single vault backend can be used.
```

If no path_prefix is provided, the prefix defaults to `/galaxy`.

## Vault configuration for Hashicorp Vault

```yaml
type: hashicorp
path_prefix: /my_galaxy_instance
vault_address: http://localhost:8200

> vault_token: galaxy_test_token

Reviewer 2: Where do I get the token from ? Is that the root token that is printed when running `vault server -dev` ?

Author: Yes, the root token should work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vault_token: Vault_application_token
```

```

> 

Reviewer: The Vault application token can is obtained using command `vault token create`. If running Vault server in `-dev` mode, a token is displayed at startup as `Root token`. For more info on how to obtain Vault tokens, see the [Vault documentation](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/vault/getting-started-authentication?in=vault/getting-started#token-authentication).

## Vault configuration for Custos

```yaml
type: custos
custos_host: service.staging.usecustos.org
custos_port: 30170
custos_client_id: custos-jeREDACTEDye-10000001
custos_client_sec: OGREDACTEDBSUDHn
```

> 

Reviewer: Obtaining the Custos client id and client secret requires first registering your Galaxy instance with Custos. Visit [usecustos.org](http://usecustos.org/) for more information.

## Vault configuration for database

```yaml
type: database
path_prefix: /galaxy
# Encryption keys must be valid fernet keys
# To generate a valid key:
#
# Use the ascii string value as a key
# For more details, see: https://cryptography.io/en/latest/fernet/#
encryption_keys:
  - 5RrT94ji178vQwha7TAmEix7DojtsLlxVz8Ef17KWgg=
  - iNdXd7tRjLnSqRHxuhqQ98GTLU8HUbd5_Xx38iF8nZ0=
  - IK83IXhE4_7W7xCFEtD9op0BAs11pJqYN236Spppp7g=
```

Secrets stored in the database are encrypted using Fernet keys. Therefore, all listed encryption keys must be valid fernet keys. To generate a new
Fernet key, use the following Python code:

```python
from cryptography.fernet import Fernet

> Fernet.generate_key()
> ```
> which would result in a byte string such as `b'pZDP8_baVs3oWT4597HJWCysm49j-XELONQ-EdoU0DE='`. Copy the string value as the encryption key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fernet.generate_key().decode('utf-8')
```
which would result in a string such as `'pZDP8_baVs3oWT4597HJWCysm49j-XELONQ-EdoU0DE='`. Copy the string value as the encryption key.

I guess that would prevent admins that are not familiar with the byte prefix in python to copy the whole output including the byte prefix.

Reviewer 2: (The triple backticks for suggestions are now mixed with the triple backticks in the suggestion 😆  ...)

If multiple encryption keys are defined, only the first key is used to encrypt secrets. The remaining keys are tried in turn during decryption. This is useful for key rotation.

> We recommend periodically generating a new fernet key and rotating old keys.

Reviewer: This could use a bit more explanation: should the old keys be removed when a new key is added or just keep adding a single new key from time to time; should multiple keys be generated at the same time? As it, it leaves the user wondering what approach will not result in encrypted keys that cannot be decrypted.
